July Retrospective Blog Post (#182)
adoptium/blog.adoptium.net: content/blog/a-summary-of-the-july-retrospectives/index.md

During the release, there were some initial missteps when not all of the new artifacts were published.  While this was easily rectified, it prompted the team to add checks for ensuring we are publishing the expected set of artifacts.   

A [Windows compiler upgrade](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/pull/2992) was also attempted prior to the release, there were unwanted side-effects, like missing libraries.  These went unnoticed because we had no tests for verifying the full set to be produced, and other testing did not spot the missing libraries either, because our test machines have the compiler installed in order to compile native test material.  The immediate action was to [revert the change](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/pull/3009), until the core issue is addressed.  To future-proof against similar problems, we will be adding smoke tests to be run in a stripped down environment.

 
## Respins
We have covered the issues introduced in our repositories that caused minor delays, now let's look at changes in the upstream OpenJDK repositories that resulted in the need to respin every JDK version of this release, a costly activity. 

> For the JDK8u345 respin, the issue is described in [JDK-8194154](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8194154), which describes the crash that would occur when changing the "user.dir" property.  While changing user.dir is discouraged, some applications still do it, notably Gradle.  This is an interesting dilemna, where the feature is highly discouraged, but still possible, and therefore it is used in the field by some number of applications.  This highlights the fact that we need to be testing with a broad set of external applications, especially ones that are used widely.  We are actively incorporating a set of tests in the AQAvit suite for this purpose, but need to progress this work.  

Reviewer: `s/JDK8u345/JDK 8u345/`

> JDK11.0.16.1, JDK17.0.4.1 and JDK18.0.2.1: c2 regression (excessive memory consumption after 17.0.4 update): [JDK-8292260](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8292260) - This defect caused *intermittent* crashes and was introduced as part of a CVE patch.  Since our Eclipse Foundation project is not a member of the Vulnerability Group (VG), we do not have access to these patches ahead of the GA tags being available.  

Reviewer: Same here. Add a space between JDK and version: `JDK 11.0.16.1` etc.

Also: The analysis of this one is not correct. The respin was necessary due to a defect in a c2 releated patch that was included with JDK early access builds `17.0.4+1` and onwards and `11.0.16+1` and better. See https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8279219 Unfortunately it got unnoticed with the existing testing. Symptom was described in https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8291665 and was mainly "observable" on JDK 11 (less so on JDK 17).

Author: thanks, I plan to incorporate the table we discussed internally which will address this section

> Looking at the last 2 years and set of unique issues forcing the need to respin (**Aug 2020:JDK-8249677**, **Nov 2020:JDK-8250861**, Feb 2022:JDK-8218546, Aug 2022:JDK-8290832, **Aug 2022:JDK-8292260**), the **majority** were introduced by CVE patches.  It would be good to understand what level of testing the VG does with these CVE patches ahead of releasing them into the OpenJDK code base, and assess what needs to be changed in order to identify these issues before delivery to avoid the churn of a respin.  

Reviewer: It's actually a minorty. **Aug 2020:JDK-8249677** and **Nov 2020:JDK-8250861** only. Question still stands as far as testing is concerned.

> In these cases, it was less likely that we would have been able to catch these failures, as we did not have weeks to soak these changes and see the intermittent issues.  The first time we have a chance to build and test with these CVE patches is the day the GA tags are made available which is Day 1 of our release period.  In order for us to have access to these patches earlier we would need to join the VG.  While there has been an effort for Eclipse Foundation to join the VG, Oracle has denied the request.  One could argue that the VG would benefit from an additional member that could assist in testing these patches more heavily and across a very broad range of platforms to boot.  In absence of membership, we will have to look at soak testing our release builds a bit longer, the unfortunate side-effect being that it could potentially increase the time it takes us to release products.    

Reviewer: Could we phrase this as "... Oracle has so far denied the request because `<reasons>`" or something like that?

Author: I was going with the public minutes of the Adoptium Steering committee call from last week, which I do not think gives a reason.  I will see what can be added here as to their decision to date.

---

> title: A Summary of the July Retrospectives

Reviewer 2: Can we change this, and the directory name of the blog, to say "July 2022"?

date: "2022-08-24T12:20:00+00:00"
author: shelleylambert
description: This post summarizes the retrospective assessment of the July 2022 CPU and various respins thereafter.
tags:
  - Temurin
  - AQAvit
---

## Introduction 
As most of our large consumer base already knows, Eclipse Adoptium is *the* community 'build, distribution and verification' project for the upstream OpenJDK project.  We serve up millions of binaries per week, as can be seen in the download trends in our dashboard (see [dash.adoptium.net](https://dash.adoptium.net/)).  We deliver these binaries in the most transparent manner.  There is no 'mystery meat' in our recipe.  In the spirit of such great transparency, this post serves to share our insights of the post mortem analysis of our most recent release activities.

We follow a strict regime of continuous improvement at the project, which means after each of our release cycles, conducting thorough retrospectives on what went well, what did not go well, and what actions are needed to improve in the future.  

## Goals and Metrics

> All good retrospective activities start with "what were we trying to achieve"?  During the July CPU, we were targeting to deliver 42 different 'products', which is essentially the platform/version combinations of Eclipse Temurin that we build, test and distribute at the project.

Reviewer: Or use "Critical Patch Update (CPU)" :)

> Based on download numbers, we have divided these products into 'primary' and 'secondary' platforms.  Currently, x64 Linux, x64 Windows and x64 Mac are the leading downloaded platforms, so they are categorized as 'primary' platforms.  The remaining platforms are categorized as 'secondary' platforms.  Within the secondary platforms, some may even be considered 'best effort' platforms which as the name suggests are put at the bottom of the priority list.  To keep our goals simple, we aim to release the primary platforms within 2 days of the OpenJDK GA tag being available.  For secondary platforms, our target is to release within 7 days of the GA tag availability.  These are summarized in a release status issue to communicate on-going status to the community.  The July release activities were tracked in [adoptium/issues/153](https://github.com/adoptium/adoptium/issues/153). 

Reviewer 2: Maybe add something here relating to "during our release cycles we frequently get asked about people's favourite platforms and when they are going to get released" and how we are also concerned about time to release. (I'm thinking splitting this paragraph at "Too keep our goals simple" and adding that information somewhere between the two / at the start of the second, but I think the "We listen to your feedback" on this message is good to convey in this blog.

| Platform | Version | Days over Target | Underlying Reasons / Notes | Actions to Improve | 
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| x64 Mac | JDK 8 | 14 | Owners need to treat as urgent, onboarding difficulties, slow connectivity | Clarify requirements with owners and improve access to TCK machines |
| x64 Mac | JDK 18 | 27 | Owners need to treat as urgent, onboarding difficulties, slow connectivity | Clarify requirements with owners and improved access to TCK machines |
| aarch64 Mac | JDK 17 | 6 | Bottlenecked on having only 1 machine for TCK | 2nd machine now added to temurin-compliance project |
| aarch64 Mac | JDK 11 | 6 | Bottlenecked on having only 1 machine for TCK | 2nd machine now added to temurin-compliance project |
| arm32 Linux | JDK 8 | 11 | Unclear, possibly slow to add an owner to it, also short-handed, team vacations | Close follow-up to ensure ownership early |
| x86 Solaris | JDK 8 | 10 | Delayed on packaging issue | Issue now fixed, [temurin-build/3061](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/issues/3061) |

> | sparcv9 Solaris | JDK 8 | 20 | Considered a best effort platform, team would/should prioritize this last | No specific action required, Reduction in effort on other platforms, and no respins would mean these lower priority platforms get released quicker |

Reviewer 2: While it will always be a lower priority platform I think we should call out that our resources on this platform are very limited in quantity and performance. While that doesn't justify a 20 day delay it is worth calling it out, particularly given that some jobs were hitting out 50 hour timeouts so ended up being started from scratch, losing a couple of days at a time, and we can try and compensate for that by adjusting timeouts in the future. This has been true of the TC runs and the other AQA tests which have seen some machine differences (https://github.com/adoptium/infrastructure/issues/2729)

What is encouraging about this list is that most of these issues have actionable responses, many of them completed during the release, as evident in our improved times for the respins.

## New Features Need New Tests
A project that is changing, is a project that is going to occasionally break.  This is will always be the case, but how do we pro-actively protect ourselves in the tug-of-war between adding new features and remaining stable and secure?  The answer is of course 'testing'.  While we have an ever-evolving suite of tests for verifying the OpenJDK binaries we produce via the [AQAvit project](https://adoptium.net/aqavit), we additionally need to be better at adding tests to verify the changes we are making to our own build and distribution scripts.

> Several changes went in ahead of the July CPU that introduced delays during the release.  2 of the changes are enhancements as part of our Secure Software Development Framework [(SSDF) activities](https://github.com/adoptium/adoptium/issues/120), [GPG signing](https://blog.adoptium.net/2022/07/gpg-signed-releases/) and the [addition of SBOM artifacts](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/issues/2900). Both of these features introduce new artifacts that can be downloaded alongside of the JDK binaries.  

Reviewer 2: Adjust this sentence - it has a list of SSDF, GPG and SBOM then refers to "both" of these features when it looks like three. Maybe 
```suggestion
Several changes went in ahead of the July CPU that introduced delays during the release.  2 of the changes are enhancements as part of our Secure Software Development Framework [(SSDF) activities](https://github.com/adoptium/adoptium/issues/120), [GPG signing](https://blog.adoptium.net/2022/07/gpg-signed-releases/) and the [addition of SBOM artifacts](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/issues/2900). The latter two of these features introduce new artifacts that can be downloaded alongside of the JDK binaries.  
```

During the release, there were some initial missteps when not all of the new artifacts were published.  While this was easily rectified, it prompted the team to add checks for ensuring we are publishing the expected set of artifacts.   

> A [Windows compiler upgrade](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/pull/2992) was also attempted prior to the release, there were unwanted side-effects, like missing libraries.  These went unnoticed because we had no tests for verifying the full set to be produced, and other testing did not spot the missing libraries either, because our test machines have the compiler installed in order to compile native test material.  The immediate action was to [revert the change](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/pull/3009), until the core issue is addressed.  To future-proof against similar problems, we will be adding smoke tests to be run in a stripped down environment.

Reviewer 2: I've chaned `like` to `in this case a` in this suggestion which you can take or leave but I think it's worth linking to the issue so people can see the specifics of the sort of thing we can hit:

```suggestion
A [Windows compiler upgrade](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/pull/2992) was also attempted prior to the release, there were unwanted side-effects - in this case a [missing runtime library](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/issues/3052).  These went unnoticed because we had no tests for verifying the full set to be produced, and other testing did not spot the missing libraries either, because our test machines have the compiler installed in order to compile native test material.  The immediate action was to [revert the change](https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/pull/3009), until the core issue is addressed.  To future-proof against similar problems, we will be adding smoke tests to be run in a stripped down environment.
```

In any event, in order for us to have access to these patches earlier we would need to join the VG.  While there has been an effort for Eclipse Foundation to join the VG, Oracle has denied the request. From the [Adoptium Steering Committee Minutes 2022-August-25](https://www.eclipse.org/lists/adoptium-wg/msg00160.html), Oracle have indicated that a reason for declining is that there is a perceived lack of contributions to OpenJDK from members of the Adoptium community.  

> Side note, in the August 25th SC meeting, it was pointed out that there is a list of contributions including those related to
> reproducible builds in the reproducible builds blog post that could be used if this is
> raised again: [Reproducible Builds at Eclipse Adoptium](https://blog.adoptium.net/2022/06/adoptium-reproducible-builds/).  One could argue that the VG would benefit from having Eclipse Adoptium as an additional member that could assist in testing these patches more heavily and across a very broad range of platforms to boot.  The current structure of the VG appears designed for corporations and their employees to join, versus open-source projects and their contributors. 
> 
> In absence of membership, we will have to look at soak testing our release builds a bit longer, the unfortunate side-effect being that it could potentially increase the time it takes us to release products.    

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Side note, in the August 25th Steering Committee meeting, it was pointed out that there is a list of contributions including those related to reproducible builds in [the reproducible builds blog post](https://blog.adoptium.net/2022/06/adoptium-reproducible-builds/).  One could argue that the OJVG would benefit from having Eclipse Adoptium as an additional member that could assist in testing these patches more heavily and across a very broad range of platforms to boot.

In absence of membership, we will have to look at soak testing our release builds a bit longer, balancing the benefits against the increased time it would take us to release products.    
```

### Positive Takeaways

> While most of this blog post has been spent analyzing what could be improved, it is important to remember that many things went well and we have continuously improved our deliveries.  This past release is no exception.  Even during this release, we were able to improve the speed with which we delivered the respun products.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While most of this blog post has been spent analyzing what could be improved, it is important to remember that many things went well and how we have continuously improved our deliveries.  This past release is no exception.  Even during this release, we were able to improve the speed with which we delivered the respun products for late changes in OpenJDK.
```
